[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What I say is how my
showing up in the world,
because the other for
me is just practice.
And if I save myself, and
I'm not really connected
with others and being
a beneficial presence
on the planet, then all
the practice in my view
is for naught.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[APPLAUSE]
>> Thank you very much.
Those of you that are here,
I want to congratulate you,
because you're here to talk
about the game of your life.
Congratulations for being here.
Winning the game of
life, this game plan
was developed, as
a lot of things
are, out of a very, very
difficult time, and 1989
for me was watershed year.
You know how a lot of
us look like we have it
all together in our lives?
Everything looks
great on the outside,
but maybe there's rumblings
inside that say otherwise.
Well, that was
certainly true for me
in 1989, because at that
time, just prior to 1989,
you would have
seen a person that
looked like he was in
a healthy relationship.
Wife and two kids, would go
into church every Sunday,
and well-coiffed and smiling
and bright-eyed and bushy tail.
By all appearances,
good health, and we
had maybe 25 or 30 tire
stores in those days
and looked like very much a
career success type thing.
So career, health, and
personal relationships,
three of our potential
areas of wake up for us.
All those looked like for me
to be pretty well in place,
everything going really well.
I kind of sensed there were
some things going on underneath,
but I was pretty good at denial.
I was pretty good
at fooling myself,
and I figured I could
out-think just about anything.
But within a four month period,
in 1989, those three things
came tumbling down.
Number one, I was
shaving one morning,
and I saw a lump right here.
And it proved to be cancer,
and it was an operation.
Took it out and
there was radiation
that occurred in that area,
and ended up being very, very
difficult. I lost my taste buds
for maybe three or four months.
Radiation burns in my
mouth, so my weight
went down to about 160-155.
And I'm 220 right now, so if
you can imagine 155 on me.
So that was very difficult.
The second thing that happened
within that four month period
was the end of my
25-year marriage.
And I guess the thing that
really hits me about that,
the night that my son--
my younger son, Chris--
the night after we had told him.
We were riding in the
car, and he looks at me.
And tears are in his eyes,
and he says, dad, we're
not a family anymore.
If that doesn't rip your
heart out, nothing does.
And the third
thing that happened
was maybe a month later,
the chief financial officer
comes in.
Says Tom, our credit
line's exhausted,
and we're million dollars
short in the bank account.
I don't know.
What are we going to do?
How are we going
to make payment?
So this was 1989 in
a four-month period.
All three of our potential
areas for wake calls--
not that there aren't
others, but those
are three the biggies--
came at once.
So I had to look and say,
OK, how have I been--
it's a reassessment
time obviously.
So what I discovered
in that reassessment
was that I'd done a really--
I spent a lot of time
controlling other people,
managing other people.
Man, I was the ultimate
manage control--
kids, spouse, employees.
Man, oh, man.
I was-- and if I heard
something in a seminar
or I read it in a book, never
did I say, wow, I could use it.
I'd say, oh, yeah,
she ought to do that.
Or yeah, yeah, the kids,
they need to read this.
In fact, I'll probably
underline it for them--
or the employees.
Yeah, we'll get
them going on that.
I didn't get it.
But this caused a
tremendous reassessment
that said, no, you can't
look outside anymore.
I couldn't send
enough endorphins
to the rescue with my workouts.
I couldn't out think it.
So I sat-- and I
didn't have the kind
of psychological and spiritual
depth to be able to handle it.
So those things sent
me crashing down.
So how did I get out?
I limped in to a therapist.
After I interviewed
five, I found
a person who ended up being
my most valuable mentor
and therapist.
And that woman happens
to be in the room.
Brenda, would you come
up please just a second.
And that is Brenda
Schafer, and, Brenda,
I want to thank you a million.
Big round of applause for this--
[APPLAUSE]
With Brenda in reading
Yogananda, Krishnamurti,
Ouspensky, Gurdjieff, Tao
Te Ching, many, many--
"A Course in Miracles"--
many, many things.
Psychologically, many
books on psychology.
Brenda, incredible
help in psychology.
So psychological,
spiritual things.
Took Tai Chi classes.
I went full-court press on this.
I figured, at 42 years
old, how easy is it
to change a 42-year-old male?
We're talking tough stuff.
So I figured, I
couldn't just have
this kind of part measures.
Just kind of let--
I think I'll just
dabble and go in and see
a therapist for a
couple three months,
find out where everybody
else is screwed up.
No.
That wasn't going to fly.
Or get a-- or for
me, born again,
and just in denial
about everything else
and just determine
to be born again.
It took full-court press,
all cylinders going.
So out of that came--
and I had no idea
in those days there
was going to be any
book out of that.
That only surfaced in
the last three years,
after tremendous amount of--
making tons of mistakes.
And I considered my company
and my personal life kind of
like my laboratory.
And I'd mix this up,
and try this, and whoop,
that didn't work.
OK, I'll try this,
and this works.
And after a lot of
trial and error,
came up with a game plan
that really works for me.
It's served up, however, to
everybody else buffet-style.
So in this book, for
instance, the word "should,"
you won't be able to find
anywhere in that book,
unless Random House
slipped it in somewhere,
because every time I
saw that was in there,
we got it out of there.
The word "oughta"
is not in there.
The word "need to"
Because we're all CEO and head
coach of our own existence.
Today, health is excellent.
I got a physical.
I wanted to get more
money, and the insurance
says-- our company has grown.
We want to have the insurance
up by many millions of dollars.
And the insurance agent
said, yeah, right.
Cancer radiation.
Sorry, Tom.
So I said, well,
let's give it a shot.
So gave an intense
all-day physical,
because we wanted lots of money.
So they-- very, very careful.
And he called me back one night.
And I had known this
agent for like 30 years.
He was a neighbor.
And he was choking.
He was really emotional,
in a nice way.
Very, very-- feeling
what was going on.
And he said, I can't
believe this, Tom.
He said, not only
can we insure you,
and even though you were dinged
for the cancer and radiation,
all the pluses on
the rest of it--
not only can we
insure you, but you're
in the lowest of six risk
categories, so that was real--
He said, I used to
laugh at your meditation
and your microbiotic
diet, he said,
and all these other
things that you do.
Tai Chi and all
these other things.
He says, I'm not
laughing anymore.
He says, this is incredible.
The second thing is that
the business became much,
much more successful, and
we grew from 20 to 25 stores
then to the size we are today.
Material abundance flowed.
But the most important thing--
the third thing-- was the
connectedness with everybody
that resulted in this.
I was living life on
more of a shallow--
kind of on a
surface-type situation.
And what's happened as a
result of this full-court press
has been deep,
deep relationships
with significant other,
with children, with parents,
with co-workers, the universe.
I mean, a depth that I never--
it's like, you can't
know what you don't know.
I had no idea that
that was available.
And the ability to have
the depth of relationships
in all of those areas has
been the number one payoff.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In determining our mission--
for me, that's bedrock.
That's key.
To have our mission, to be in
touch with our mission, what
our mission is about, our why.
Nietzsche said, "Once
you know your why,
you can bear most any how."
So for me, that was really key.
When I got in touch with
my mission, I said, OK.
And that was done
through a guided imagery
in Brenda's office that
was very, very powerful.
And once I got in
touch with my mission,
then, despite all the
challenges and roadblocks I saw,
that provided the
spark, the fuel.
There's a saying that
the pull of the future
is more powerful than
the push of the past.
So there was something about
that, OK, here's my mission.
And it was like, OK,
here's my assignment.
I got in touch
with my assignment.
So OK, what's the next step?
I'm just moving toward it.
I'm just walking,
and going toward it,
making things happen.
Now, in order to get
myself stabilized--
because I was in rough shape.
I couldn't get out
of bed each day.
And when I did, I limped into
the office, laid on the couch,
and put do not disturb on
the door and the phone.
So I did-- in order
to stabilize--
go for about six months
with Prozac and Buspar,
an antidepressant
and an anti-anxiety.
I was in such difficult shape.
Now, I may have done it with
a one-ring wake-up call.
I may have done it with a two.
I know I did it with three.
I'm not sure.
But whatever it took to--
I was not able to even
stabilize myself to think.
So that got me the ability to
even halfway think straight,
with all three of those
things happening at once.
Then, as the game plan
got kicking in, then
after six months,
I was fortunately
able to not do that.
But I encourage anyone
who is in such trauma--
and by the way, I
think the key on some
of these-- doing a
game plan like this
if you're not in
trauma or crisis,
but if you're seeing some little
cracks in the foundation in any
of those areas, then I just wish
I'd have engaged in the game
plan, because many of us
don't do that until we've
come crashing down.
It's like a "pay me
now or pay me later."
You might as well go through
and be proactive about it,
and not wait until that occurs.
And that's-- by the way--
why, even though
I'm blessed today,
I'm staying on this game plan.
It's like, I'm
staying on my knees.
OK, I'm going to keep doing it.
Rather than forget, I
don't want to forget.
I want to remember it
so that I keep doing it,
rather than have a relapse.
So discover my
mission was bedrock.
And I figured, if my
only why, my only mission
was to give pain
to my birth mother
and consume natural
resources, that probably
wasn't a high level
of really what
I wanted to accomplish here.
So I got in touch with something
a little deeper than that.
And there's two ways
to be able to do this.
One is a birth
exploration, in terms of--
we did the guided imagery.
And you can do it with a
psychologist, or a friend,
or with yourself.
Whatever method someone
wants to do that.
Going back before my birth, and
envisioning myself being born.
And asking a higher power--
having a higher power ask
me what my mission is,
and my being able to
get in touch with that.
So that was an important piece.
The second way to do that
is a death exploration.
Is to think about,
OK, if somebody says,
no, I really don't want to
do that, OK, then a death
exploration is another one.
What do you want somebody to say
about you, as far as a eulogy?
What would you like
somebody to say?
And a personal mission
statement can be one sentence,
or it can be two pages.
Some people have differing
opinions on the length.
I say, go with what
feels good to you.
Mine is seven sentences.
My mission statement
is to become
more awakened and
conscious and connected
in all my relationships.
It's to support that evolution
through this winning game plan.
It's to share love with
family and friends.
It's to share these
concepts in my--
and create a
business environment
where I can share
these concepts.
Not with a "should" or an
"oughta," but with something
that is served up buffet-style
with our teammates.
It's to respect the
Earth that we live on.
It's to share the skills that
I've learned in the business
world with those I
know that are doing
great work in the world in terms
of personal growth and higher
consciousness.
People like Deepak and John
Robbins, and various others,
to take--
because this is a
two-worlds deal.
The business world
sometimes looks
at the self-help, personal
growth, higher consciousness
movement with saying,
well, wait a minute.
Little weird.
And I see that the personal
growth community sometimes
looks at business--
especially medium-sized and big
business-- as a little weird.
I'll walk into Present Moment
if I happen to have a suit on.
They go, what's this guy
doing invading our space?
So it's like, I've
seen discrimination
going in both worlds, FYI.
So I love both worlds, and I
think what this book is about,
and this game plan is
about, is about merging
the best of both worlds.
And the last one is
that of helping people
accomplish their mission.
And through the
book, the ability
to be able to share things
that may help, in some way,
each person accomplish
their mission
and have a more fulfilled life.
So those are the seven
pieces of my mission.
The second element of the
plan is that of these seven
take-action steps.
And these are these
very linear steps
that start with goal-setting.
Whereas your mission was my
overall for-life situation--
which, of course,
can be tweaked--
the seven take-action steps
start with goal-setting.
This annual goal-setting.
Every November,
December, I sit down
and I say, what do
I want to accomplish
moving toward my mission
in each of those areas?
In each of those areas are my
headings in my goal-setting.
Now, I like outlining for
my annual goal-setting.
And let's say all of those
where were the headings.
Then I would use subheadings
under each of those.
And under the parents and
elders, let's say one of mine,
some time ago, was deepen my
relationship with my mother.
So maybe you could put deepen
your relationship-- let's
say parents and elders
would be the heading.
And then a subheading would
be, deepen your relationship
with blank, and put
whatever you wanted to put.
I'm going to use an
example with mother.
Now, this is going to sound a
little linear for some people,
but just hang with
me just a minute.
Then I would put
things like, OK, I
want to take an annual
vacation with mom.
OK, I'd write that down.
Let's say I want to
call her every Sunday.
Let's say I want to do
this, and I want to do that.
And I'd lay out.
Send cards on these dates.
I want to do these kinds
of things with mom.
And then there was the
qualitative-type things.
I want to share more
deeply with mom.
I want to find out what's
going on in her world.
Find out how she feels
about things, what
she did when she was young.
I want to share things that
are going on in my life
more deeply.
So there are those
qualitative-type things.
But what I would
do in each area--
and then I would take
each one of those areas.
And with children, OK, I want
an annual vacation, just them
and I, where we do
this, this, and this.
And lay these things out.
Now, if at the end of
each year right now,
you're giving and getting
in the world in each
of these relationships,
then I wouldn't screw around
with this, because it has that
linear component that maybe is
necessary to be able to do it.
For me, though, I'd
say, god, the year pa--
I didn't get this done,
didn't get that done.
So this gives it the
ability, when I lay out--
and it takes me a couple hours
to lay out two or three sheets.
And then I convert
those goals and action
plans right to my schedule
as I'm doing my scheduling.
You know when we say
what our priorities are?
What we say what they
are and our schedule,
check your schedule
out and that will
say what they actually are.
So for me, the connecting the
dots of, here's my mission,
then here are my goals to help
me get toward my mission, goals
and action plans,
then here are my--
then I'm moving
that to my schedule
and it actually happens.
Now you say, too
structured for me.
Too not spontaneous enough.
You know what?
I'm able to be
spontaneous because I know
that those things are all set.
So when I'm doing activities,
anything I'm doing,
I'm really in the
present moment.
I'm not thinking about,
gosh, what do I have to do?
Because I know this
stuff is set out.
I also know that if
something else comes up,
now I want to be careful and
not engage in procrastination,
but I also know that if I
need to call an audible,
I still have the
flexibility to do that.
Then time competency is another
one of the seven action steps.
How many of you
have all the time
you need to get done whatever
you need to get done?
OK, I don't see any hands.
A couple tips on that.
One would be,
careful the message
we're sending
ourselves each day.
I was sending
myself the message,
I don't have enough time,
I don't have enough time.
We all know the
power of our minds,
and the placebo effect, and--
this group certainly knows
the power of the mind.
So careful of the messages
that we're sending ourselves.
Secondly, to understand actually
how many hours we truly do
have in a week.
And we have 168.
If you sleep seven hours
a night, you got 120 left.
If you work 50 hours a week, you
got 70 waking non-worked hours.
Now, if you work or
sleep slightly different,
adjust that.
Maybe it's 60.
Maybe it's 70.
Maybe it's 80.
But the average person has 70
waking non-work hours per week
available.
Doesn't feel that way, does it?
Well, I talk about in the
book what I call the seven
sabotaging time-stealers.
The things that I believe
filch time from us.
One of them is that of doing
non-mission-related activities.
Because if I haven't
determined my mission,
and determined what are the
goals, the action plans,
and what I want to do in
1999, then what happens?
I end up getting bounced
around like a ping pong ball.
And I'm doing other
things, and I'm not
spending time on the
things that I need to do--
the things that I want to
get and give in the world.
Remember, when I'm talking
about goal-setting,
I'm talking about what
I want to get and give.
It's not a me, me,
me, want, want, want.
It's a two-way situation.
A third sabotager is that of TV.
And now, TV/internet.
Now, Wisdom TV would go
a long ways, and PBS.
There's some good programming,
so don't get me wrong.
So TV was one thing that
didn't make the cut.
That was gone.
Now, today, I probably
watch a half an hour a day,
and catch a little CNN to see
what's happening on the news.
But TV went.
The average person
watches 25 hours a week.
And that's 33%,
roughly one third
of their waking non-work hours.
So-- by the way.
And if that's according to
what we want out of our lives,
then great.
Go for it.
In other words, if we
determine that's part
of our mission, that's part of
our goal-setting for the year,
then high-five
yourself, because this
isn't about shoulds
or oughtas, but it's
about doing things consciously.
Remember?
Waking up.
That's what this whole
movement's about,
is doing things in
a more awakened,
more conscious manner.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
These are the behaviors,
these are the traits
that I think are critical.
And we also look for
teammates that are like that.
I look for this in myself, and I
look for teammates on our team.
It's the thing that we
recruit for at Tires Plus.
The six things that we look for.
The first is that of--
and our six traits
are the acronym COPPSS.
It signifies it.
Now, our COPPSS has
two Ps and two Ss.
The first is that of caring.
Being caring.
Now, what do most
people say when they
are interviewing for a job?
They like to work with what?
>> People.
>> You got it.
People.
What do a lot of people
say after three, four,
or five months in a high
people-contact business?
>> Hate people.
>> [CHUCKLING] I hate people.
These people.
I can't stand them.
Oh my god, these people.
Well, in this laboratory of my
company, I've looked at that,
and I've really looked
at that and examined it.
And I've seen-- and this
is a gross generalization,
but you have one
group that are people
that, yeah, they like
to work with people,
but don't let me have to go out
of my way too much for them.
You ever seen that in a waiter,
a waitress, or some clerk?
They're not mean.
It's just there's a little
bit of an imposition.
And then there's people
that-- and by the way,
for those people, helping
people sucks energy from them.
They're depleted
by helping people.
Then you've got people
that are altruistic,
service-oriented, curious
about people, love people.
Not only like to work with them,
but really truly like to help
them.
And those people generally
draw energy from others,
and from that helping.
They really-- it's exciting.
It's exciting for them.
Wow, this is fun.
Wow, I get to help.
Doesn't mean that
those people don't
have an occasional
rough experience,
or an occasional rough day.
But by and large, they draw
energy from helping people.
So check your caring index.
My dad, by the way,
is one of those
that has a high
caring index that
are real curious about people.
One day, my two
sons and I and he
were retracing his steps that he
had taken during World War II.
We were in Paris.
We were in the Louvre Museum.
And it was about five minutes
before the thing was to close,
and we hadn't seen
the Mona Lisa.
And we were lost.
So Dad says, I'll
go ask these people.
So he goes over
and he asks them.
It's like about a
minute or two has gone.
He's over there talking to them.
I say, Dad, where are you going?
He says, oh, these are
the greatest people!
We can see that another time.
He didn't care.
He loves people.
So check your caring index.
Where are you on
the caring index?
Are you high?
Are you low?
And let me tell
you, if you think
that the relationships you're in
and how we're acting in those--
those affect it.
Our spiritual connection,
our psychological wellness,
our physical wellness.
How we're eating, how we're
exercising, how we're sleeping.
These things all have--
if I'm not doing well in
those areas, I'm cranky.
But if I am, I'm taking care
of myself in those areas.
And that's sometimes what
we got to look at, is--
we can also err
on the other side,
is give, give, give
to everyone else,
and we don't take
care of ourselves
so we can then nurture
and give to others.
So caring's a big piece.
Optimism is another
important piece.
I'm talking about
authentic optimism.
I'm not talking about
the phony optimism.
If you saw "Fargo," the
car salesperson there.
I'll say, how's it going?
Oh, great.
Everything's great.
You betcha.
Or the Eddie Haskell type.
"Oh, Mrs. Cleaver, don't
you look great today."
I'm not talking about
that kind of stuff.
I'm also not talking
about negativism,
where it's like, oh,
you can't do this.
There's no way you can do
this here in this company.
No way you can do that.
And sending messages to ourself
on, we're not very good,
or I'm not very good.
That kind of thing
is sabotaging to us,
and that pessimism
drags us down.
And because of the
power of the mind
really makes it not possible
for things to happen.
As a matter of fact, that
kind of thing is like--
I believe we all have this
wise coach that's coaching us.
And then this
rambunctious child that's
wanting to go over and do this.
So it'd be like, if we're
sending negative thoughts
to ourselves and
being a pessimist,
then it's like, let's say we're
huddling our team together
and we're saying,
OK, inner team.
You're not very good.
You're probably not going to
win this game of your life.
But go out there
and play it anyway.
Well, that's not going to work.
It's also not going to work
that everything's perfect here.
We do our affirmations.
Everything's good.
I love myself.
No.
But what is is,
hey, you know what?
There's some challenges
here, but here's
how we're going to overcome it.
We can do it.
OK.
So it's authentic optimism.
The third trait is
that of passion.
Getting passion into our lives.
True passion.
And I was more
into the intellect,
and really didn't get in
touch with the full passion.
I didn't have my heart, my gut,
my soul into what I was saying.
I was very into the intellect.
How many of you have
ever given an apo--
and passion enters into
various ways of our lives,
but our apologies, selling,
coaching or leading others
are just three of many ways.
Let's take an apology.
(DRYLY) I'm sorry if I did
something that made you mad.
I'm sorry.
That's very discounting to
you, and I'm-- we got the right
lingo, right?
It's very discounting to you.
And I'm sure you don't
feel good about that,
and I can totally
understand that.
Or are you doing this?
And by the way, don't
say it like this
if you don't really feel it.
So we're not talking about
phony-ing something up.
But if you really do feel
apologetic, then get in touch
and say, (CONCERNED) gosh,
I am so sorry I did that.
That is not OK.
Very discounting to you.
I'm so sorry.
Different deal?
And again, don't phony it up.
That's all I'm saying.
If you do truly feel
sorry, bring your heart,
your gut, your soul into it.
And you won't have
many apologies
that aren't accepted if
you apologize like that.
So ask yourself.
And why this is so
important is because
of the importance of
tone and body language,
which is 93% of
our interpersonal--
of what people get,
or the message people
is receiving for us
that are receiving
from us in our communications.
93%.
7% is actually the words.
So real, real important
piece to have passion in it.
The fourth trait is
that of persistence.
Persistence is about, when
we keep going for it--
Murphy's laws work
a lot of times.
If anything can
go wrong, it will.
Now, never vision Murphy's law.
Of course, the
power of the mind.
But know that it has the
potential underpinnings
of things going on.
So to access that
persistence is important.
For me, the best
example of persistence
was back in 1976, '77.
We had just started the company.
And you remember the shortage
in the gasoline lines?
Yeah, or the li-- no
shortage in the lines.
The lines were long.
The gas was short.
And we had three gas
stations back then
that we turned them
into tire stores.
That's how we got started.
We bought three
Shell gas stations
and turned them
into tire stores.
So gasoline was an important
part of what we were doing.
And we got our allocation
from the government,
and the allocation
was way too low.
So we said, OK, what
are we going to do?
Well, we're going to appeal it,
in the interest of persistence.
And we appealed it.
Appeal denied.
And we said, OK, we're
going to call down.
I'm going to appeal the appeal.
There is no such
process, so stay at home.
So I said, well, I'm
going to go to Chicago.
And that's where
headquarters were.
And I saw the name of the head
of the Department of Energy,
Ray Feeney.
Says, I'm going to go see him.
Fly to Chicago.
Go up there.
Ask the receptionist.
Say, can I see Mr. Feeney?
And she says, no, you
can't see Mr. Feeney.
He is so busy.
I said, ma'am, I've
got to see Mr. Feeney.
I'll just sit down over here.
I knew he had to
come out sometime.
I sit, I sit, I sit.
It must have been
2, 2 and 1/2 hours.
Finally, he came out.
Ted, would you mind helping
me out on this, please?
There's no poetic
license being taken here.
This is exactly what happened.
And Mr. Feeney did
walk into the restroom.
Would you mind?
And I did follow him.
I swear, this is
exactly what happened.
[LAUGHTER]
I said, Mr. Feeney, I am
so sorry to bother you.
And he was using the facilities.
He was.
I said, my name's Tom Gegak.
Tires Plus in Minneapolis.
And I gave him 30 seconds on
why we should get our appeal.
He said, OK, kid.
Get into my office.
And we got the increased appeal.
Let's give Ted a
round of applause.
[APPLAUSE]
So persistence.
Critical.
Think about the things.
What are the roadblocks
for you right now?
Are there certain roadblocks
that are standing in your way?
And if you've done
the double-check on,
is this part of my mission?
Is this honoring
to me and others?
If it meets various criteria,
go for it, go for it, go for it.
Then the fifth trade is
that of systems discipline.
Are we following the rules and
procedures in our companies?
I know us free spirits
don't like to do that.
But if we don't,
there's chaos, so try
to do your best to
abide by the rules.
Especially the higher-ups,
they like that.
They think they're higher-ups.
They're not higher-ups.
But they like those biding
by the rules things.
So score some points.
Sixth is that of
being spirit-filled.
Spirit-filled.
This is the sixth trait.
And to me, this is
personified by what
Obi Wan Kenobi said to Luke.
And he said, "May the
force be with you."
And when that force
is with me, when
I'm in touch with my mission,
and I'm acting consistently,
congruently with that, and
moving toward my mission
and acting rightly in the
world, and when that happens,
I'm telling you, waters
part, doors open,
coincidences occur
that are unbelievable.
The kind of things that ended
up resulting in this book
are incredible.
At Deepak Chopra's
daughter's wedding
in India in December of '96.
And I had just only vaguely
thought of writing a book.
And we were out with Deepak's
publicist, Arielle Ford,
for a walk.
She says, you want
to go for a walk?
And the park we're
walking in was a park
that Deepak's editors from
Random House was walking in.
And he said, oh,
let's have lunch.
We go to lunch.
He starts asking about--
I start telling a little
bit about my story.
Based on what she
said, she says,
have you ever thought
of writing a book?
I said, I bet a ton
of people ask you.
I don't know you were
going around asking people.
So the kind of coincidences
that have occurred
with that and so
many other things
as I've been in touch with
my mission and acting rightly
is just incredible.
So spirit-filled is
such an important piece,
as you all know.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The next four areas are that
of wellness, overall wellness,
holistic wellness,
integrated wellness.
Physical is one aspect
of that, as we said.
It's our bodies.
How are we eating?
What does food do--
and everything we take
into our body, food and drink.
What does that do to our bodies?
What is the purpose?
To provide what?
>> Fuel.
>> Nutrition.
>> Fuel and nourishment.
So out of the three criteria
that we pick for food
in terms of convenience,
taste, and nourishment,
where does nourishment rank?
>> Last.
>> It's last.
So think about where
you're ranking it
in terms of-- nourishment for
me is now an important piece.
Is convenience part?
Yeah.
Is taste part?
But nourishment's
important piece for me.
And just ask yourself, how am
I nourishing all the tissues
and cells in my body?
Sometimes we take a pill and
we say, what will this pill do?
Can you imagine what the
15 pounds of food, how
that's affecting us each week?
Now, I went macrobiotic in '89.
Eat mostly organic foods.
But if I'm in a restaurant
and I can't get what I need,
I don't stress out
about it either.
I did a long time
ago, but I don't now.
I do my very best.
So taking in healthy foods.
Whole foods.
There are many, many great
places to get whole foods here
in the Twin Cities.
So food.
Very important piece.
Exercise.
I said-- exercise.
If you look at the benefits of
exercise, it's unbelievable.
Destressor.
Reduces chance of
heart disease by 60%.
Breast cancer by 64%.
Significantly reduces the
chance of prostate cancer,
colon cancer.
We're talking heavy duty
increase your clarity of mind.
I mean, if they put all that
in a pill, it'd outsell Viagra.
That exercise is
great, great stuff.
So what I do is I schedule
it as an appointment.
It's like, I got an appointment
with myself to go exercise.
And I get what I call--
ever the good
businessman-- a good ROIT,
return on invested time.
Because you know what?
If I exercise for an hour
and a half three times
a week, which I do, then that's
4 and 1/2, 5 hours a week.
Then for all the
rest of the time--
and when I exercise
for an hour and a half,
I get 48 hours worth
of really feeling good.
Really clear-minded.
Really energetic.
And when I don't, I'm stressed.
So the food-- food
determines your mood--
food and exercise, two
critical, critical pieces
for our physical.
And we know that.
So this isn't like
new information.
By the way, if you're
hearing something today
and you say, I've heard it,
rather than "I've heard it,"
ask yourself, am I doing it?
Do I want to do it?
If you don't want to do it--
if you don't want to exercise
and you don't want
to eat right--
no problem.
Then the other things that were
helpful for me were bodywork.
The energy work that I did.
The chakra work was just
tremendously helpful.
I had a real blockage
in the heart.
It was like--
I had just a ton of
work, the heart chakra,
to be able to feel more.
Intellectual wellness.
We talked about that a ton.
I'm going to move--
just think about, are you using
your right and left brain?
Or you're just using
your right or your left?
Or are you using both?
Are you taking in all the
information we have today?
Or are you getting rid of the
information you don't need
and taking information
that can benefit you,
and converting that to
knowledge and then to wisdom?
It becomes knowledge
when you retain it.
It becomes wisdom
when you retain it
and you use it with regard
to attaining your mission.
I talked about 10
different plays
in the book, plays
or methods to be
able to make behavioral
modifications.
One of those plays
is self-coaching.
Some people might
be sharp enough
to be able to make those
behavioral changes just
by coaching yourself
and saying, OK, Tom.
You're ready to do this.
Don't do it.
That's something
you want to drop.
You're ready to do it.
Don't, don't, don't.
So you can coach yourself.
That's one option.
Another option is
that of books, tapes.
Another option is that of
what I call one-on-one.
One-on-one is a
great therapist to be
able to help move
me through these,
and facilitate team to
assist in the dropping
of these behaviors.
The identification of them
and the dropping of them,
or modifying.
So that's another
excellent, excellent way.
Then group therapy was another
important trait for me,
or another play that helped me.
The group was
important because--
the one-on-one was great,
but the group really
complemented it.
And then there
were retreats where
we'd go on a one-week
retreat where
we're practicing these
behaviors in a full week,
stumbling here, stumbling there.
So those are some of the ways
in terms of psychological.
Spiritual wellness.
There are many ways for
spiritual practice we all know.
Prayer, meditation.
I meditate half an hour a day.
And I also do what I call
affirmations that are sutras.
And I learned it
from Deepak, where
they are various one-word
affirmations that
line up four per chakra.
So there's 28 of them.
So that's been a powerful,
powerful situation,
are those one-word sutras
which line up with each chakra.
For instance, the root chakra
is stability, flexibility,
coherence, and transformation.
So there's the four
that I say to myself,
and aim the consciousness
into that area.
For the crown, it's infinity,
immortality, enlightenment,
and holy.
So I get real power out of
that when I say those words
and visualize something that
reminds me of those words
and aim it into those
areas, those energy centers.
So wise words.
There's a lot of great books.
So 10 ways I talk about in
terms of spiritual practice.
But you know what?
That's practice.
And that's important.
Practice is important.
But the real game for me,
spiritual wellness, and really
accessing spirit, is, how
am I showing up every day?
Am I smiling at people, or
am I frowning at people?
Am I encouraging people, or
am I discouraging people?
Am I forgiving people,
or am I holding grudges?
Am I asking for forgiveness,
or am I saying, eh.
Yeah.
Maybe that was a bad
idea to blow them off.
So what?
Am I holding the door?
As I'm going through the door
and somebody's 10 feet behind,
am I holding it for them,
or am I letting it slam?
In my home, when I use the
last of the toilet paper,
am I replacing the roll, or
am I saying, let her do it?
I mean, there are a million
different things that
are what I call the real game.
And many of us have been talking
spiritual practice for 10 years
now.
So what I say is, how am
I showing up in the world?
Because the other, for
me, is just practice.
And if I save myself, and
I'm not really connected
with others and being
a beneficial presence
on the planet, then all
the practice, in my view,
is for naught.
I'll end by saying I wish
you all the very best
in winning in the
game of your life.
And on the trip, keep
things in perspective.
We know that life is messy.
It's challenging.
Scott Peck says in his
book "Road Less Traveled,"
first three words,
"Life is difficult."
So it is messy.
But if we keep things
in perspective,
keep these relationships, keep
our mission in perspective,
that can help.
And this message of keeping
things in perspective
is best illustrated
with a letter
that a young woman wrote
to her mom from college.
She says, dear
Mom, I thought I'd
write to let you know what's
been going on here at school.
Don't get worried, but
my arm's in a cast.
I broke it yesterday
when I did jump out
of the dorm window
because of the fire
which was accidentally
started when Mary and I got
too high smoking pot.
[CHUCKLING]
They kept us in jail overnight.
It doesn't matter it's
my writing hand that's
broken because I'm going
to quit school next week
and marry Johnny anyway.
Johnny's father has
offered him a partnership
in his gas station in Alaska.
That really sounds swell.
There's an extra room
over the station which
would be large enough at
least until the baby comes
in a few months.
Hope things are
going well for you.
Love, Molly.
PS, there's no fire.
I didn't break my hand.
I don't smoke dope.
I didn't get put in jail.
I didn't quit school.
I didn't marry Johnny,
and I'm not pregnant.
However, I did get
a D in chemistry,
and I just wanted you to put
things in a proper perspective.
[CHUCKLING]
So--
[APPLAUSE]
Thank you.
Keep things in their
proper perspective,
and I wish you all winning
in the game of your life.
Thank you very much.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]